---
layout: post
title: "IBD (Identical By Descent) vs IBS (Identical By State)"
date: 2015-04-29
---

The term IBS, Identical by State, refers to the situation that two DNA segments are identical at all possible allele positions, no matter how that matching occurred. The two segments can be IBD (if the matching alleles are inherited from a common ancestor in a genealogical timeframe) or not (if the segment is ubiquitous within a specific population). To understand the latter situation, think about right/left-handedness. Ten percent of the population are left-handed. If you are right-handed and meet another person that is right-handed, does that mean you are relatives? Of course not. You might further argue that IBS segments essentially IBD, because every allele that modern people (Homo sapiens sapiens) got from Lucy’s people (Australopithecus afarensis). True, but when we talk about IBD, we often restrict ourselves to a genealogical time frame (about 500 to possibly slightly more than 1000 years, or the last 20 generations).

There are several ways certain sequences become very common in a population. That sequence could be very old and because it provided a very slight advantage to those that had it, it remained intact for thousands of years. But because the advantage was small enough, those that didn’t have the exact same sequence could also thrive and reproduce but at a slightly lower rate. Another way is when a population goes through an evolutionary bottleneck. This is where the population gets very small for whatever reason — disease, famine, or isolation such as when small group migrates to a new land — and then expands to fill its niche again. When this happens, the assortment of alleles that are available is sharply reduced. In these cases, many people can have similar alleles that are IBS but their common ancestor would have to be traced all the way back to the bottleneck. When the bottle neck is far enough back that no (or few) genealogical records persist, those segments are now considered IBS.

If your father and your mother both have the same sequence one of their chromosome pairs and both you and your sister inherit one copy of that sequence from different parents, then that segment is IBS between you and your sister and not IBD. But <b>there is no way to determine that happened</b>. The more similar or inbred the population that your parents come from were, the more likely this is to happen. Also note that current DNA typing techniques cannot say which one of the two chromosomes each allele came from. For example, if you are <b>A</b>A <b>G</b>G <b>A</b>A <b>C</b>C you will match me when I am <b>A</b>G <b>A</b>G <b>A</b>G <b>C</b>T, but there is no guarantee that A G A C came from the same chromosome (e.g., it could be A--G on one chromosome and A--C on the other). To be more confident in our conclusion, a much longer match is often needed. 


IBD mapping can form a potentially powerful method for detecting rare variants in unrelated individuals at the population level.


rare events, need fine-scale mapping (IBD help find finer region) and powerful statistical test
Despite this success, the variants identified by GWAS to date only explain 18–24% of the heritability. While much of the missing heritability is probably explained by common variants of even smaller effect sizes, some heritability may be explained by rare variants of larger effect size. Standard analysis of GWAS data is not designed to detect associations with rare variants that many believe may play an important role in the aetiology of complex traits. Interestingly, GWAS have had less success for putative neurodegenerative diseases such as Parkinson's disease. For these diseases, family-based approaches detecting rare variants have been more successful. This raises the possibility that <b>rare variants under negative selection pressure</b> are relatively more important in the genetic architecture of neurodegenerative processes, whereas <b>common variants under balancing selection</b> are more important in the genetic architecture of immunological processes.

Standard analyses of GWAS data are not designed to detect associations with low frequency variants (MAF≤5%), and other strategies are required. One approach is to re-analyse GWAS data using identity-by-descent (IBD) mapping, also referred to as population-based linkage analysis (PBLA). PBLA describes linkage analysis applied at the population level to detect mega base-scale regions where cases have inherited long haplotypes from distant ancestors, 10–100 generations ago. IBD mapping is performed on the unrelated individuals to determine whether these mega-base scale regions are identical and inherited from a common ancestor. If the common ancestor lived more than ten generations ago the individuals will share very short tracts of genetic material, and a shared haplotype that is very rare is also very likely to be IBD. HapMap Phase 3 identified that lower frequency variants should, on average, be younger than more common variants; and thus display a greater extent of haplotype sharing Therefore, if case pairs can be detected with long shared haplotypes (generally one to five megabases) inherited from distant common ancestors, then rare variants influencing disease risk can be localised. Even when whole genome sequencing becomes cheap enough to pursue with substantial sample sizes, IBD mapping may still help reduce the massive multiple testing problem by prioritizing regions. 

Several methods of IBD mapping have been published: these include PLINK [24], GERMLINE [27], BEAGLE IBD [28] and BEAGLE fastIBD [29]. The models employed by PLINK and GERMLINE assume SNPs are in linkage equilibrium, and so ‘pruning’ of SNPs [24] is required to avoid false positives due to under-estimates of population haplotype frequencies. However pruning of SNPs in incomplete linkage disequilibrium (LD) discards potentially useful information and reduces power. BEAGLE IBD and fastIBD implement a variable length Hidden Markov Model [30] to account for LD and model haplotype frequencies more accurately. BEAGLE fastIBD runs considerably faster than BEAGLE IBD (of the order of 1000 times faster with large GWAS datasets). This is mainly because 1) it does not formally model IBD status (‘IBD’/’not IBD’) between pairs of individuals using a Hidden Markov Model as in BEAGLE IBD; 2) it stores haplotype frequencies in a data dictionary (as in GERMLINE) which means computational time scales with sample size n like nlog n instead of n^2. 

The optimal method to detect rare disease-causing variants is whole genome sequencing of thousands of samples. When this becomes affordable, there will remain a role for IBD analysis to prioritize regions for follow-up analysis and minimize the massive multiple testing burden. Just as linkage analysis is now used to identify regions for follow-up in whole genome sequencing and exome sequencing of Mendelian disease families, and linkage analysis can be used to weight regions for GWA analysis.

IBD analysis limitations: it is only suited to discover rare variants if all variants act in the same direction in one gene. For example, the identified rare variants in BRCA1 and BRCA2 gene all increase risk of breast cancer [56], and the four rare variants identified in IFIH1 gene all protect against type I diabetes [18]. If some rare variants increase risk while others in the same gene decrease risk then the signal in the region will be attenuated. In addition, we found IBD analysis is very sensitive to genotyping error, resulting in reducing signal strength. The linkage signal detected depends on a lot of markers or long haplotypes, containing up to hundreds of SNPs, a single error occurring in reading a single marker significantly reduces the signal. In our data, samples came from different GWAS using different genotyping chips in different locations, which at least in part, may decrease the potential signal strength from our study. Furthermore, resequencing would be complicated by gene duplication and repeat regions, since the linkage region detected in this study had many gene duplicates, thus replication in other independent dataset is needed.

The technique known as association mapping differs from traditional pedigree studies in that marker-disease associations
are sought in populations of unrelated individuals. To explain the idea behind this approach, imagine that a disease causing mutation has just occurred in a population. The chromosome on which this mutation occurred contains specific alleles in neighboring polymorphic loci. At first, the mutation will only be observed in conjuction with these alleles, so the association with these alleles will be high. Through time these associations will dissipate because of recombination, but the closest loci will experience the fewest recombinations and hence retain the highest levels of LD. Thus, by looking for significant correlations between disease state and alleles, we can hope to identify the region in which the disease causing genetic mutation lies.
