---
layout: post
title: "Long-range haplotypes and rare variants"
date: 2015-08-19
---
<h2>Rare variants</h2>
Although genome-wide association studies (GWAS) have revealed numerous common susceptibility variants for complex diseases, only a small fraction of disease heritability can be explained. the target sets of variants of interest for
association studies have increasingly included rarer variants and SNPs. Following
the logic described in Chap. 2, all variants are expected to have a single origin, and
the specific chromosome that the variant arose upon is uniquely identifiable by
patterns of marker variants nearby the site of origin. It follows that rare SNPs should
be imputable on the basis of rare haplotypes of the common SNPs that are typically
present on a GWAS array. Since rare SNPs are (in the absence of selective
pressures) almost always of recent origin, it follows that the marker haplotype
marking the new variant may still be unaffected by recombination occurring after
the origin of the rare variant and thus still be recognizable. This means that the
imputation of rare variants may be possible using common SNPs

<h2>Detecting rare variants by imputation</h2>
One of the crucial questions has to do with the necessary size of the reference
panel needed in order to get good imputation quality. The required reference panel
size increases as the frequency of the SNPs (or haplotypes in the above discussions)
that are being imputed decreases. An analysis by Liu et al. [24] considered imputation of both common and rare SNPs that were genotyped in about 2,000
subjects. They found that with this many individual samples (and withholding
genotyped data so that “dosage R2
,” i.e., R2 between imputed dosage variable and
true genotype could be directly examined), a reference panel of ~2,000 samples
could impute with R2  0.8 SNPs with minor allele frequency in the range from
1 % to 3 %. Note that alleles with frequency 1 % would be seen an expected
40 times in a reference panel of 2,000 individuals. This is roughly the same number
of minor alleles that would be expected to be seen in a reference panel of 40–100
samples (e.g., approximately HapMap sized) for SNPs in frequency range 0.2 to
0.5, and indeed SNPs in this frequency range are generally highly imputable with
HapMap data [25]. Naively scaling this to rarer SNPs implies that reference panels
of size at least 20,000 samples are required to impute SNPs with minor allele
frequencies at 1/10 of 1 % with this same level of imputation accuracy.
In this naı¨ve scaling, however, the issue of haplotype uncertainty as embodied in
the R2
h calculation of Chap. 5 has been neglected. Without recombination there is a
limit on the total number of haplotypes (and hence also a limit on the number of rare
haplotypes), so if many rare haplotypes are to be defined by common SNPs, then
recombination must be present. If a rare SNP falls on one or more rare haplotypes of
common SNPs, it may not be well imputed by the common SNPs since imputation
accuracy declines with the amount of recombination
